2 Definition

As every schoolboy knows, a circle is a locus of coplanar points equidistant from a center. What every schoolboy does not know is the difference between repeating that definition as a parrot might and uttering it intelligently. So, with a sidelong bow to Descartes’s insistence on the importance of understanding very simple things, let us inquire into the genesis of the definition of the circle.


2.1 The Clue

Imagine a cartwheel with its bulky hub, its stout spokes, its solid rim. Ask a question. Why is it round? Limit the question. What is wanted is the immanent reason or ground of the roundness of the wheel. Hence a correct answer will not introduce new data such as carts, carting, transportation, wheelwrights, or their tools. It will refer simply to the wheel. Consider a suggestion. The wheel is round because its spokes are equal. Clearly, that will not do. The spokes could be equal yet sunk unequally into the hub and rim. Again, the rim could be flat between successive spokes. Still, we have a clue. Let the hub decrease to a point; let the rim and spokes thin out into lines; then, if there were an infinity of spokes and all were exactly equal, the rim would have to be perfectly round; inversely, were any of the spokes unequal, the rim could not avoid bumps or dents. Hence we can say that the wheel necessarily is round inasmuch as the distance from the center of the hub to the outside of the rim is always the same. A number of observations are now in order. The foregoing brings us close enough to the definition of the circle. But our purpose is to attain insight, not into the circle, but into the act illustrated by insight into the circle. The first observation, then, is that points and lines cannot be imagined. One can imagine an extremely small dot. But no matter how small a dot may be, still it has magnitude. To reach a point, all magnitude must vanish, and with all magnitude there vanishes the dot as well. One can imagine an extremely fine thread. But no matter how fine a thread may be, still it has breadth and depth as well as length. Remove from the image all breadth and depth, and there vanishes all length as well.


2.2 Concepts

The second observation is that points and lines are concepts. Just as imagination is the playground of our desires and our fears, so conception is the playground of our intelligence. Just as imagination can create objects never seen or heard or felt, so too conception can create objects that cannot even be imagined. How? By supposing. The imagined dot has magnitude as well as position, but the geometer says, ‘Let us suppose it has only position.’ The imagined line has breadth as well as length, but the geometer says, ‘Let us suppose it has only length.’ Still, there is method in this madness. Our images and especially our dreams seem very random affairs, yet psychologists offer to explain them. Similarly, the suppositions underlying concepts may appear very fanciful, yet they too can be explained. Why did we require the hub to decrease to a point and the spokes and rim to mere lines? Because we had a clue – the equality of the spokes – and we were pushing it for all it was worth. As long as the hub had any magnitude, the spokes could be sunk into it unequally. As long as the spokes had any thickness, the wheel could be flat at their ends. So we supposed a point without magnitude and lines without thickness, to obtain a curve that would be perfectly, necessarily round. Note, then, two properties of concepts. In the first place, they are constituted by the mere activity of supposing, thinking, considering, formulating, defining. They may or may not be more than that. But if they are more, then they are not merely concepts. And if they are no more than supposed or considered or thought about, still that is enough to constitute them as concepts. In the second place, concepts do not occur at random; they emerge in thinking, supposing, considering, defining, formulating; and that many-named activity occurs, not at random, but in conjunction with an act of insight.


2.3 The Image

The third observation is that the image is necessary for the insight. Points and lines cannot be imagined. But neither can necessity or impossibility be imagined. Yet in approaching the definition of the circle there occurred some apprehension of necessity and of impossibility. As we remarked, if all the radii are equal the curve must be perfectly round, and if any radii are unequal the curve cannot avoid bumps or dents. Further, the necessity in question was not necessity in general but a necessity of roundness resulting from these equal radii. Similarly, the impossibility in question was not impossibility in the abstract but an impossibility of roundness resulting from these unequal radii. Eliminate the image of the center, the radii, the curve, and by the same stroke there vanishes all grasp of necessary or of impossible roundness. But it is that grasp that constitutes the insight. It is the occurrence of that grasp that makes the difference between repeating the definition of a circle as a parrot might and uttering it intelligently, uttering it with the ability to make up a new definition for oneself. It follows that the image is necessary for the insight. Inversely, it follows that the insight is the act of catching on to a connection between imagined equal radii and, on the other hand, a curve that is bound to look perfectly round.


2.4 The Question

The fourth observation adverts to the question. There is the question as expressed in words. Why is the wheel round? Behind the words there may be conceptual acts of meaning, such as ‘wheel,’ ‘round,’ etc. Behind these concepts there may be insights in which one grasps how to use such words as ‘wheel,’ ‘round,’ etc. But what we are trying to get at is something different. Where does the ‘Why?’ come from? What does it reveal or represent? Already we had occasion to speak of the psychological tension that had its release in the joy of discovery. It is that tension, that drive, that desire to understand, that constitutes the primordial ‘Why?’ Name it what you please – alertness of mind, intellectual curiosity, the spirit of inquiry, active intelligence, the drive to know. Under any name, it remains the same, and is, I trust, very familiar to you. This primordial drive, then, is the pure question. It is prior to any insights, any concepts, any words; for insights, concepts, words have to do with answers, and before we look for answers we want them; such wanting is the pure question. On the other hand, though the pure question is prior to insights, concepts, and words, it presupposes experiences and images. Just as insight is into the concretely given or imagined, so the pure question is about the concretely given or imagined. It is the wonder which Aristotle claimed to be the beginning of all science and philosophy. But no one just wonders. We wonder about something. 2.5 Genesis                            [10] A fifth observation distinguishes moments in the genesis of a definition. When an animal has nothing to do it goes to sleep. When a man has nothing to do he may ask questions. The first moment is an awakening to one’s intelligence. It is release from the dominance of biological drive and from the routines of everyday living. It is the effective emergence of wonder, of the desire to understand. The second moment is the hint, the suggestion, the clue. Insight has begun. We have got hold of something. There is a chance that we are on the right track. Let’s see. The third moment is the process. Imagination has been released from other cares. It is free to cooperate with intellectual effort, and its cooperation consists in endeavoring to run parallel to intelligent suppositions, while at the same time restraining supposition within some limits of approximation to the imaginable field. The fourth moment is achievement. By their cooperation, by successive adjustments, question and insight, image and concept present a solid front. The answer is a patterned set of concepts. The image strains to approximate to the concepts. The concepts, by added conceptual determinations, can express their differences from the merely approximate image. The pivot between images and concepts is the insight. And setting the standard which insight, images, and concepts must meet is the question, the desire to know, that could have kept the process in motion by further queries had its requirements not been satisfied. 


2.6 Nominal and Explanatory Definition

A sixth observation distinguishes different kinds of definition. As Euclid defined a straight line as a line lying evenly between its extremes, so he might have defined a circle as a perfectly round plane curve. As the former definition, so also the latter would serve to determine unequivocally the proper use of the names ‘straight line,’ ‘circle.’ But in fact Euclid’s definition of the circle does more than reveal the proper use of the name ‘circle.’ It includes the affirmation that in any circle all radii are exactly equal; and were that affirmation not included in the definition, then it would have had to be added as a postulate. To view the same matter from another angle, Euclid did postulate that all right angles are equal. Let us name the sum of two adjacent right angles a straight angle. Then, if all right angles are equal, necessarily all straight angles will be equal. Inversely, if all straight angles are equal, all right angles must be equal. Now, if straight lines are really straight, if they never bend in any direction, must not all straight angles be equal? Could not the postulate of the equality of straight angles be included in the definition of the straight line, as the postulate of the equality of radii is included in the definition of the circle? At any rate, there is a difference between nominal and explanatory definitions. Nominal definitions merely tell us about the correct usage of names. Explanatory definitions also include something further that, were it not included in the definition, would have to be added as a postulate. What constitutes the difference? It is not that explanatory definitions suppose an insight while nominal definitions do not. For a language is an enormously complicated tool with an almost endless variety of parts that admit a far greater number of significant combinations. If insight is needed to see how other tools are to be used properly and effectively, insight is similarly needed to use a language properly and effectively. Still, this yields, I think, the answer to our question. Both nominal and explanatory definitions suppose insights. But a nominal definition supposes no more than an insight into the proper use of language. An explanatory definition, on the other hand, supposes a further insight into the objects to which language refers. The name ‘circle’ is defined as a perfectly round plane curve, as the name ‘straight line’ is defined as a line lying evenly between its extremes. But when one goes on to affirm that all radii in a circle are equal or that all right angles are equal, one no longer is talking merely of names. One is making assertions about the objects which names denote. 


2.7 Primitive Terms

A seventh observation adds a note on the old puzzle of primitive terms. Every definition presupposes other terms. If these can be defined, their definitions will presuppose still other terms. But one cannot regress to infinity. Hence, either definition is based on undefined terms or else terms are defined in a circle so that each virtually defines itself. Fortunately, we are under no necessity of accepting the argument’s supposition. Definitions do not occur in a private vacuum of their own. They emerge in solidarity with experiences, images, questions, and insights. It is true enough that every definition involves several terms, but it is also true that no insight can be expressed by a single term, and it is not true that every insight presupposes previous insights. Let us say, then, that for every basic insight there is a circle of terms and relations, such that the terms fix the relations, the relations fix the terms, and the insight fixes both. If one grasps the necessary and sufficient conditions for the perfect roundness of this imagined plane curve, then one grasps not only the circle but also the point, the line, the circumference, the radii, the plane, and equality. All the concepts tumble out together, because all are needed to express adequately a single insight. All are coherent, for coherence basically means that all hang together from a single insight. Again, there can be a set of basic insights. Such is the set underlying Euclidean geometry. Because the set of insights is coherent, they generate a set of coherent definitions. Because different objects of definition are composed of similar elements, such terms as point, line, surface, angle keep recurring in distinct definitions. Thus, Euclid begins his exposition from a set of images, a set of insights, and a set of definitions; some of his definitions are merely nominal; some are explanatory; some are derived partly from nominally and partly from explanatorily defined terms. 


2.8 Implicit Definition

A final observation introduces the notion of implicit definition. D. Hilbert has worked out foundations of geometry that satisfy contemporary logicians.2 One of his important devices is known as implicit definition. Thus, the meaning of both point and straight line is fixed by the relation that two and only two points determine a straight line. In terms of the foregoing analysis, one may say that implicit definition consists in explanatory definition without nominal definition. It consists in explanatory definition, for the relation that two points determine a straight line is a postulational element such as the equality of all radii in a circle. It omits nominal definition, for one cannot restrict Hilbert’s point to the Euclidean meaning of position without magnitude. An ordered pair of numbers satisfies Hilbert’s implicit definition of a point, for two such pairs determine a straight line. Similarly, a first-degree equation satisfies Hilbert’s implicit definition of a straight line, for such an equation is determined by two ordered pairs of numbers. The significance of implicit definition is its complete generality. The omission of nominal definitions is the omission of a restriction to the objects which, in the first instance, one happens to be thinking about. The exclusive use of explanatory or postulational elements concentrates attention upon the set of relationships in which the whole scientific significance is contained.

Lonergan, Bernard. Insight, Volume 3 (Collected Works of Bernard Lonergan) . University of Toronto Press. Kindle Edition. 