2.4 EMERGENT PROBABILITY
There have been formulated the notion of a conditioned series of schemes of recurrence and, as well, the general sense in which one can speak of the probability of the emergence and the survival of single schemes. From these considerations there now comes to light the notion of an emergent probability. For the actual functioning of earlier schemes in the series fulfils the conditions for the possibility of the functioning of later schemes. As such conditions are fulfilled, the probability of the combination of the component events in a scheme jumps from a product of a set of proper fractions to the sum of those proper fractions. But what is probable, sooner or later occurs. When it occurs, a probability of emergence is replaced by a probability of survival; and as long as the scheme survives, it is in its turn fulfilling conditions for the possibility of still later schemes in the series.
Such is the general notion of emergent probability. It results from the combination of the conditioned series of schemes with their respective probabilities of emergence and survival. While by itself it is extremely jejune, it possesses rather remarkable potentialities of explanation. These must now be indicated in outline, and so we attempt brief considerations of the significance for emergent probability of spatial distribution, absolute numbers, long intervals of time, selection, stability, and development.
FIRSTLY, the notion of a conditioned series of schemes involves spatial concentrations. For each later set of schemes becomes possible in the places where earlier schemes are already functioning. Accordingly, the most elementary schemes, which are earliest in the series, can occur anywhere in the initial distribution of materials. But the second batch can occur only where the first have in fact occurred, the third can occur only where the second have in fact occurred, and so on. Moreover, since the realization of the schemes is in accord with the probabilities, which may be low, one cannot expect all possibilities to be actuated. Hence elementary schemes will not be as frequent as they could be, to narrow the possible basis for schemes at the second remove. These will not be as frequent as they could be, to narrow again the possible basis for schemes at the third remove, and so forth. It follows that, however widespread the realization of elementary schemes, there will be a succession of constrictions of the volumes of space in which later schemes can be found. Similarly, it follows that the points, so to speak, of greatest and least constriction occur where the probabilities of emergence of the next set of schemes are respectively the lowest and the highest. Finally, it follows that, since the latest schemes in the series have the greatest number of conditions to be fulfilled, their occurrence will be limited to a relatively small number of places.
SECONDLY, there is the significance of absolute numbers. For large numbers offset low probabilities. What occurs once onc a million occasions is to be expected a million times on a million-million occasions. Now the minimum probability pertains to the latest schemes in the series, for their emergence supposes the emergence of all earlier schemes. It follows that the lower the probability of the last schemes of the conditioned series, the greater must be the initial absolute numbers in which elementary schemes can be realized. In brief, the size of a universe is inversely proportionate to the probability of its ultimate schemes of recurrence.
THIRDLY, there is the significance of long intervals of time. No matter how great the universe and how widespread the functioning of elementary schemes, there is an increasing concentration of the spatial volumes in which later schemes can be realized. Sooner or later the initial benefit of large numbers is lost by the successive narrowing of the basis for further developments. But at this point long intervals of time become significant. Just as a million-million simultaneous possibilities yield a million probable realizations whose probability is one in a million, so also a million-million successive possibilities yield a million probable realizations under the same expectation.
FOURTHLY, there is a selective significance attached to the distinction between probabilities of emergence and probabilities of survival. If both are low, the occurrence of the scheme will be both rare and fleeting. If both are high, the occurrences will be both common and enduring. If the probability of emergence is low and that of survival is high, the scheme is to be expected to be rare but enduring. Finally, in the opposite case, the expectation is that the scheme will be common but fleeting.
FIFTHLY, this selectivity has its significance for stability. The functioning of later schemes depends upon the functioning of earlier schemes, so that if the earlier collapse, then the later will collapse as well. It follows that the line of maximum stability would be of common and enduring schemes, while the line of minimum stability would be of rare and fleeting schemes.
SIXTHLY, no less than stability, the possibility of development must be considered. Unfortunately, these two can conflict. Schemes with high probabilities of survival tend to imprison materials in their own routines. They provide a highly stable basis for later schemes, but they also tend to prevent later schemes from emerging. A solution to this problem would be for the earlier, conditioning schemes to have a high probability of emergence but a low probability of survival. They would form a floating population on which later schemes could successively depend. Because their probability of survival wasd low, they would readily surrender materials to give later schemes the opportunity to emerge. Because their probability of emergence was high, they would readily be available to fulfil the conditions for the functioning of later schemes.
Needless to say, the foregoing considerations are extremely rudimentary. They are limited to the emergent probability of any conditioned series of schemes of recurrence. They make no effort towards developing that notion in the direction of its application to the conditions of the emergence and survival of modes of living. However, while absolutely such a fuller exposition would be desirable, still it has no place in a merely generic account of world order. For the premise of a generic account is, not the content of the natural sciences, but the possibility and validity of their assumptions and method.
The point we are endeavoring to make, within the limits of our narrow premise, is that the notion of emergent probability is explanatory. Intelligent inquiry aims at insight. But classical laws alone offer no insight into numbers, distributions, concentrations, time intervals, selectivity, uncertain stability, or development. On the contrary, they abstract from the instance, the place, the time, and the concrete conditions of actual functioning. Again, statistical laws, as a mere aggregate, affirm in various cases the ideal frequency of the occurrence of events. They make no pretense of explaining why there are so many kinds of events, or why each kind has the frequency attributed to it. To reach explanation on this level, it is necessary to effect the concrete synthesis of classical laws into a conditioned series of schemes of recurrence, to establish that such schemes, as combinations of events, acquire first a probability of emergence and then a probability of survival through the realization of the conditioned series, and finally to grasp that, if such a series of schemes is being realized in accord with probabilities, then there is available a general principle that promises answers to questions about the reason for numbers and distributions, concentrations and time intervals, selectivity and uncertain stability, development and breakdowns. To work out the answers pertains to the natural sciences. To grasp that emergent probability is an explanatory idea is to know what is meant when our objective was characterized as a generic, relatively invariant, and incomplete account of the immanent intelligibility, the order, the design of the universe of our experience.


2.5 CONSEQUENCES OF EMERGENT PROBABILITY
There remains the task of working out the generic properties of a world process in which the order or design is constituted by emergent probability. This we shall attempt in two main steps. First, we shall summarize the essentials of the notion of emergent probability. Secondly, we shall enumerate the consequences of that notion to be verified in world process.
The essentials of the notion of emergent probability may be indicated in the following series of assertions:
(1) An event is what is to be known by answering yes to such questions as, Did it happen? Is it occurring? Will it occur?
(2) World process is a spatiotemporal manifold of events. In other words, there are many events, and each has its place and time.
(3) Events are of kinds. Not every event is a new species, else there could be neither classical nor statistical laws.
(4) Events are recurrent. There are many events of each kind, and all are not at the same time.
(5) There are regularly recurrent events. This regularity is understood inasmuch as combinations of classical laws yield schemes of recurrence. Schemes are circular relationships between events of kinds, such that if the events occur once in virtue of the circular relationships, then, other things being equal, they keep on recurring indefinitely.
(6) Schemes can be arranged in a conditioned series, such that the earlier can function without the emergence of the later, but the later cannot emerge or function unless the earlier already are functioning.
(7) Combinations of events possess a probability, and that probability jumps, first when a scheme becomes concretely possible in virtue of the fulfilment of its prior conditions, and secondly when the scheme begins actually to function.
(8) The actual frequencies of events of each kind in each place and at each time do not diverge systematically from their probabilities. However, actual frequencies may diverge non-systematically from probabilities, and that nonsystematic divergence is chance. Accordingly, probability and chance are distinct and are not to be confused.
(9) Emergent probability is the successive realization in accord with successive schedules of probability of a conditioned series of schemes of recurrence.
The consequent properties of a world process in which the design is emergent probability run as follows:
(1) There is a succession of world situations. Each is characterized (a) by the schemes of recurrence actually functioning, (b) by the further schemes that now have become concretely possible, and (c) by the current schedule of probabilities of survival for existing schemes and of probabilities of emergence for concretely possible schemes.
(2) World process is open. It is a succession of probable realizations of possibilities. Hence it does not run along the iron rails laid down by determinists, nor on the other hand is it a non-intelligible morass of merely chance events.
(3) World process is increasingly systematic. For it is the successive realization of a conditioned series of schemes of recurrence, and the further the series of schemes is realized, the greater the systematization to which events are subjected.
(4) The increasingly systematic character of world process can be assured. No matter how slight the probability of the realization of the most developed and most conditioned schemes, the emergence of those schemes can be assured by sufficiently increasing absolute numbers and sufficiently prolonging intervals of time. For actual frequencies do not diverge systematically from probabilities; but the greater the numbers and the longer the time intervals, the clearer the need for a systematic intervention to prevent the probable from occurring.
(5) The significance of the initial or basic world situation is limited to the possibilities it contains and to the probabilities it assigns its possibilities. By the initial world situation is meant the situation that is first in time; by the basic world situation is meant the partial prolongation through time of initial conditions, such as arises, for instance, in certain contemporary hypotheses of continuous creation.  In either case, what is significant resides in possibilities and their probabilities, for in all its stages world process is the probable realization of possibilities. While the determinist would desire full information, exact to the nth decimal place, on his initial or basic situation, the advocate of emergent probability is quite satisfied with any initial situation in which the most elementary schemes can emerge and probably will emerge in sufficient numbers to sustain the subsequent structure.
(6) World process admits enormous differentiation. It envisages the totality of possibilities defined by classical laws. It realizes these possibilities in accord with its successive schedules of probabilities. And given sufficient numbers and sufficient time, even slight probabilities become assured.
(7) World process admits breakdowns. For no scheme has more than a probability of survival, so that there is for every scheme some probability of a breakdown; and since earlier schemes condition later schemes, a breakdown of the former entails the breakdown of the latter.
(8) World process includes blind alleys. For schemes with a high probability of survival have some probability of emergence. Insofar as they emerge, they tend to bind within their routines the materials for the possibility of later schemes, and so to block the way to full development.
(9) The later a scheme is in the conditioned series, the narrower is its distribution. For actual realization is less frequent than its concrete possibility; and each later set of schemes is concretely possible only where earlier, conditioning schemes are functioning.
(10) The narrower the basis for the emergence of each later set of schemes, the greater the need to invoke long intervals of time. For in this case the alternative of large numbers is excluded.
(11) The greater the probabilities of blind alleys and breakdowns, the greater must be the initial absolute numbers if the realization of the whole series of schemes is to be assured. For in this case the device of long time intervals might not be efficacious. Blind alleys with their inert routines could last for extremely long periods, and when they suffered breakdown, they might result in another blind alley. Again, a situation which led to some development only to suffer breakdown might merely repeat this process more frequently in a longer interval of time. On the other hand, the effect of large initial numbers is to assure at least one situation in which the whole series of schemes will win through.
(12) The foregoing properties of world process are generic. They assume that there are laws of the classical type, but they do not assume the determinate content of any particular classical law. They assume that classical laws can be combined into the circular relationships of schemes, but they do not venture to analyze the structure of any scheme whatever. They assume that there are statistical laws, but there is no assumption of the determinate content of any statistical law.
Moreover, these properties are relatively invariant. They rest on the scientist’s necessary presupposition that there are classical and statistical laws to be determined. But they in no way prejudge the determination of those laws nor the manner in which they are to be combined to yield schemes of recurrence and their successive probabilities. It follows that the foregoing properties of world process cannot be upset by any amount of scientific work in the determination of classical or statistical laws.
Again, these properties are explanatory of world process. They reveal an order, a design, an intelligibility. For they account in generic fashion for numbers and time intervals, for distributions and concentrations, for blind alleys and breakdowns, for enormous differentiation, for increasing systematization, for stability without necessity, for assurance without determinism, for development without chance.
Finally, the intelligibility offered by the explanation is immanent in world process. It exhibits the inner design of world process as an emergent probability, and from that design it concludes to the outstanding generic features of the same process. Accordingly, since empirical method aims at such an immanent intelligibility, emergent probability is a view of world order within the limits of empirical method. As we began by inviting the reader to grasp the intelligibility immanent in the image of a cartwheel, so now we are inviting him to perform again the same kind of act. The only difference is that, for the image of the cartwheel, he now must substitute the main features of the universe of our experience.


3 CLARIFICATION BY CONTRAST
There is a clarification of ideas through contrast with their opposites. As we have argued that an acceptance of both classical and statistical laws leads to some such world view as emergent probability, so now we have to see how different methodological positions result in different world views.
...