3 Genus as Explanatory

Mechanist determinism is bound to conceive all things as of a single kind. For mechanism posits things as instances of the ‘already out there now real’; determinism makes every event completely determined by laws of the classical type; and the combination of the two views leaves no room for a succession of ever higher systems, for mechanism would require the higher component to be a ‘body,’ and determinism would exclude the possibility of the higher component modifying lower activities.

On the other hand, the notion of the thing as an intelligible concrete unity differentiated by experiential and explanatory conjugates clearly implies the possibility of different kinds of things. Moreover, since explanatory conjugates are defined by their relations to one another, there is the possibility of distinct sets of such conjugates. There follows the notion of the explanatory genus. Consider a genus of things Ti, with explanatory conjugates Ci, and a second genus of things Tj, with explanatory conjugates Ci and Cj, such that all conjugates of the type Ci are defined by their relations to one another, and similarly, all conjugates of the type Cj are defined by their relations to one another. Then, since Ci and Cj differ, there will be two different systems of terms and relations; as the basic terms and relations differ, all logically derived terms and relations will differ, so that by logical operations alone there is no transition from one system to the other. Now it seems that such explanatory genera exist. The laws of physics hold for subatomic elements; the laws of physics and chemistry hold for chemical elements and compounds; the laws of physics, chemistry, and biology hold for plants; the laws of physics, chemistry, biology, and sensitive psychology hold for animals; the laws of physics, chemistry, biology, sensitive psychology, and rational psychology hold for men. As one moves from one genus to the next, there is added a new set of laws which defines its own basic terms by its own empirically established correlations. When one turns from physics and chemistry to astronomy, one employs the same basic terms and correlations; but when one turns from physics and chemistry to biology, one is confronted with an entirely new set of basic concepts and laws. No doubt, a mechanist would have to claim that biology does not differ essentially from astronomy. He would argue that biology introduces its special terms and laws merely as a matter of convenience, that biology deals not with a new genus of things but with extremely complex macroscopic products of the same old things. Already we have stated the case against mechanism and determinism, and so we have only to indicate how the possibility of new genera arises. 

Consider, then, a genus of things Ti, with explanatory conjugates Ci, and a consequent list of possible schemes of recurrence Si. Suppose there occurs an aggregate of events Eij that is merely coincidental when considered in the light of the laws of the things Ti and of all their possible schemes of recurrence Si. Then, if the aggregate of events Eij occurs regularly, it is necessary to advance to the higher viewpoint of some genus of things Tj, with conjugates Ci and Cj, and with schemes of recurrence Sj. The lower viewpoint is insufficient, for it has to regard as merely coincidental what in fact is regular. The higher viewpoint is justified, for the conjugates Cj and the schemes Sj constitute a higher system that makes regular what otherwise would be merely coincidental.

Accordingly, if the laws of subatomic elements have to regard the regular behavior of atoms as mere patterns of happy coincidences, then there is an autonomous science of chemistry. If the laws of chemistry have to regard the metabolism and division of cells as mere patterns of happy coincidences, then there is an autonomous science of biology. If the laws of biology have to regard the behavior of animals as mere patterns of happy coincidences, then there is an autonomous science of sensitive psychology. If the laws of sensitive psychology have to regard the operations of mathematicians and scientists as mere patterns of happy coincidences, then there is an autonomous science of rational psychology. Nor does the introduction of the higher autonomous science interfere with the autonomy of the lower; for the higher enters into the field of the lower only insofar as it makes systematic on the lower level what otherwise would be merely coincidental.

As has been remarked, the succession of sciences corresponding to the succession of higher genera does not admit any purely logical transition. Each of these main departments has its own basic terms defined implicitly by its own empirically established correlations. Still, this negation of a logical transition must not be interpreted as a negation of any transition whatever. For logical operations are confined to the field of concepts and definitions, hypotheses and theories, affirmations and negations. This field is only part of the larger domain that includes as well sensitive presentations and imaginative representations, inquiry and insight, reflection and critical understanding. Within this larger domain, the successive departments of science are related, for the laws of the lower order yield images in which insight grasps clues to laws of the higher order. In this fashion, the Bohr model of the atom is an image that is based on subatomic physics yet leads to insights into the nature of atoms. Again, the chemistry of the cell can yield an image of catalytic process in which insight can grasp biological laws. Again, an image of the eye, optic nerve, and cerebrum can lead to insights that grasp properties of the psychic event ‘seeing,’ and so the oculist can make one see better, and more generally the surgeon can make one feel better. Finally, it is with respect to sensed and imagined objects that the higher levels of inquiry, insight, reflection, and judgment function.

This linking of the main departments of science runs parallel to the notion of successive higher viewpoints outlined in our first chapter. Just as elementary arithmetic and elementary algebra are distinct systems, with different rules yielding different operations and different operations yielding different numbers, so the main departments of science are distinct systems without logical transitions from one to the other. Just as the image of ‘doing arithmetic’ leads to the insights that ground algebra, so images based on the lower science lead to insights that ground elements of the higher science. Finally, it is because new insights intervene that the higher science is essentially different from the lower.

Naturally, the reader will be inclined to view these images as pictures of reality. In this fashion intelligence is reduced to a pattern of sensations; sensation is reduced to a neural pattern; neural patterns are reduced to chemical processes; and chemical processes to subatomic movements. The force of this reductionism, however, is proportionate to the tendency to conceive the real as a subdivision of the ‘already out there now.’ When that tendency is rejected, reductionism vanishes. The real becomes the verified, and one can argue in the opposite direction that, since there is no verifiable image of the subatomic, there can be no verifiable image of objects composed of subatomic elements. The verifiably imagined is restricted to the sensibly given. One has to be content with reasonable affirmations of intelligently conceived terms and relations. On that showing, the function of the transition images is simply heuristic; such images represent, perhaps only symbolically, the coincidental manifold that becomes systematic when subsumed within the higher genus.

To conclude, let us remark that we have been concerned merely to reveal the possibility of genera of things and their compatibility with the sciences as they exist. A much longer investigation would be needed to prove that in fact there are such genera. We are convinced that the longer inquiry can be omitted safely enough, for the contention that things are all of one kind has rested, not on concrete evidence, but on mechanist assumption.

Lonergan, Bernard. Insight, Volume 3 (Collected Works of Bernard Lonergan) . University of Toronto Press. Kindle Edition. 